[docs] add a vision document for Swift -> C++ interoperability (#61256)
apple/swift: docs/CppInteroperability/SwiftToCppInteroperabilityRoadmap.md

# C++ Interoperability Roadmap: Bridging Swift to C++

## Introduction

This roadmap document presents a high level overview of the “reverse” (i.e. using Swift APIs from C++) half of the C++ interoperability Swift language feature. It highlights the key principles and goals that determine how Swift APIs are exposed to C++ users. It also outlines the evolution process for this feature. This document does not present the final design for how Swift APIs get mapped to C++ language constructs. The final design of this feature will evolve as this feature goes through the Swift evolution process.

> This document does not cover the “forward” (i.e. using C++ APIs from Swift) half of the C++ interoperability feature, as it’s already covered by a sibling document that can be found here: https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/60501 (https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/60501/files).

Author: I will use a file reference once the forward interop roadmap PR lands. For now I will make a it a proper markdown link though.

> ## Overview of How Swift Is Bridged to C++

Reviewer: This is a general request: only the main title should be title-cased; section titles should be capitalized as if they were sentences.  But in this case you might want a different title, anyway.

The right flow for a vision document is usually a statement of the current situation and the problems being faced, followed by the goals analysis, followed by the proposed approach.  You don't have much of the first part, which in this case I would expect to talk about (1) why people need reverse interop, (2) a description of reverse ObjC interop and its inherent limitations (e.g. being opt-in with `@objc`), and (3) the ways that C++ interop is less inherently limited.  What you've got here is more like the start of the proposed approach.

> Swift and C++ have different approaches to interoperability with each other. The Swift compiler embeds a copy of the Clang compiler, which is then used to import C and Objective-C declarations into Swift for Objective-C interoperability. Similarly to Objective-C, Swift uses the embedded Clang compiler to import C++ declarations when the user wants to access C++ APIs from Swift. Swift also allows Objective-C code to call into Swift declarations annotated with the @objc attribute. Instead of being embedded into Clang, Swift generates an Objective-C compatibility header that contains the Objective-C declarations that the Swift programmer intended to expose to Objective-C. 

Author: Thanks, that was helpful.

## Goals

Swift and C++ are both feature rich programming languages. While they both have a lot of similar features, Swift has some features which C++ can not represent natively. For instance, Swift supports overloading based on argument labels, but C++ does not. A gap like this can be bridged in an idiomatic manner between the two languages, as the C++ name of the exposed Swift function can be modified to reflect the Swift argument labels. However, some Swift features like result builders can not be bridged in an idiomatic manner to C++. Therefore, we can assume that it is impractical for Swift to expose all Swift APIs to C++. Additionally, some Swift API patterns, like conforming Swift types to specific protocols, require advanced compiler features that are impractical to support in a generated header. Thus, we can assume that it is also impractical for Swift to bridge all Swift API patterns into C++.

> For the reasons outlined above, it is not a goal to expose every Swift API and language construct to C++, and it is also not a goal to make every Swift library accessible to C++. There will certainly be libraries that will lend themselves well to an ergonomic and an idiomatic C++ interface, however, there will always be some libraries that rely on language features or API patterns that can’t be bridged to C++ in a reasonable manner. 

Reviewer 2: Ideally users would not be encouraged to write Swift APIs using a subset of the language that mapped well to C++ in hopes of vending a nice C++ API interface. Mostly, this is not something we can prevent. But maybe there's a way to call that out here, or keep it in mind. I think it's a hard goal to express, though, so maybe best to just leave it out.

It is a goal to allow mixed Swift and C++ projects to call their own Swift APIs that lend themselves well to interoperability from C++, and do it in a safe, performant and ergonomic manner. It is also a goal to allow these exposed Swift APIs to use Swift types from other Swift libraries (including the Swift standard library), even if the other Swift library wasn’t developed with C++ interoperability in mind. 

When Swift APIs get exposed to C++, the Swift compiler and the language specification should follow several key principles that are presented below.

### Safety

> Safety is a top priority for the Swift programming language. Swift code expects its caller to adhere to Swift’s type rules and Swift’s memory model, regardless of whether it’s called from Swift or C++. Thus, the C++ code that calls Swift should properly enforce Swift’s expected language contracts. Such enforcement is needed to minimize the risk of Swift behaving in an unexpected manner at run-time when it’s being called from C++, as such behavior could lead to buggy program behavior or crashes that a Swift programmer would not expect to see in their Swift code. This kind of enforcement does not prevent all possible issues though. For instance, a bug in user’s C++ code could accidentally overwrite a Swift object stored on the heap, which could cause unexpected behavior or crashes in Swift code. To catch bugs like this one, the user should use other program analysis tools such as address sanitizer.

Reviewer 2: > This kind of enforcement does not prevent all possible issues though. For instance, a bug in user’s C++ code could accidentally overwrite a Swift object stored on the heap, which could cause unexpected behavior or crashes in Swift code.

Of course this is true. It feels a little weird to call out this specific example (unless I'm missing something). C++ has a lot of unsafe tools, which allow you to do things like this (override heap memory). Swift also has tools that do something similar, they are just (usually) marked "unsafe". I wonder if it wouldn't be helpful to call out that similarity in a more general way: writing any C++ is like using unsafe Swift APIs, and Swift programmers should have similar expectations (in terms of safety).

> Safety is a top priority for the Swift programming language. Swift code expects its caller to adhere to Swift’s type rules and Swift’s memory model, regardless of whether it’s called from Swift or C++. Thus, the C++ code that calls Swift should properly enforce Swift’s expected language contracts. Such enforcement is needed to minimize the risk of Swift behaving in an unexpected manner at run-time when it’s being called from C++, as such behavior could lead to buggy program behavior or crashes that a Swift programmer would not expect to see in their Swift code. This kind of enforcement does not prevent all possible issues though. For instance, a bug in user’s C++ code could accidentally overwrite a Swift object stored on the heap, which could cause unexpected behavior or crashes in Swift code. To catch bugs like this one, the user should use other program analysis tools such as address sanitizer.

Reviewer 2: You talk about Swift's safety model here, but it might be good to call out explicitly: even though a C++ programmer is calling Swift APIs, C++'s safety model will not change. (I guess the example at the end sort of does that.) And you should probably call out what "C++'s safety model" means in this case: C++ often makes safety the user's responsibility, so users will have to be aware of Swift's safety model and will be responsible for enforcing Swift's model on the C++ side.

Author: Updated this paragraph to something like this to incorporate your feedback:

Safety is a top priority for the Swift programming language. Swift code expects its caller to adhere to Swift’s type rules and Swift’s memory model, regardless of whether it’s called from Swift or C++. Thus, the C++ code that calls Swift should properly enforce Swift’s expected language contracts. The enforcement should be done automatically in the generated header. Such enforcement is needed to minimize the risk of Swift behaving in an unexpected manner at run-time when it’s being called from C++, as such behavior could lead to buggy program behavior or crashes that a Swift programmer would not expect to see in their Swift code. This kind of enforcement does not prevent all possible issues though, as it does not change C++'s safety model. C++ is unsafe by default, and the user is able to use regular C++ pointers to write to memory as if they were using Swift's `UnsafeMutablePointer` type. This means that bugs in C++ code can easily lead to violations of Swift's expected invariants. For instance, a bug in user’s C++ code could accidentally overwrite a Swift object stored on the heap, which could cause unexpected behavior or crashes in Swift code. The user is expected to obey Swift's memory model and type rules when calling into Swift APIs from C++, and thus they bear the ultimate responsibility for avoiding bugs like this one. The user can use certain program analysis tools, such as Address Sanitizer, to help them catch bugs that violate Swift's memory model rules.

> Swift expects that values of correct types are passed to Swift APIs. For instance, for calls to generic functions, Swift expects the caller to pass a value of type that conforms to all of the required generic requirements. Type safety should be enforced from C++ as well. The C++ compiler should verify that correct types are passed to the Swift APIs as they’re invoked from C++. A program that tries to pass an incorrect Swift type into a Swift function should not compile. If type verification can not be done at compile-time for such program, the program should trap when an invalid call is performed.

Author: I think it should be possible to check conformance or same-type requirements statically for most cases. The primary case that stands out as needing dynamic type checking is Opaque types, as it won't be possible to do static type checking when working with such types. I will talk about them.

> Memory safety is paramount for Swift code. Swift automatically manages the lifetime of value and reference types in Swift. These principles should translate to C++ as well. The lifetime of Swift values that are created or passed around in C++ should be managed automatically. For instance, the generated C++ code should increment the retain count of a Swift class instance when a Swift class type value is copied in C++, and it should decrement the retain count of a Swift class instance when a Swift class type value is destroyed in C++. The default convention for using Swift types in C++ should discourage dangling references and other kinds of memory bugs as much as possible.

Author: Reworded to "The default convention for using Swift types in C++ should discourage dangling references and any other patterns that could lead to an invalid use of a Swift value."

Swift’s memory safety model also requires exclusive access to a value in order modify that value. For instance, the same value can not be passed to two inout parameters in the same function call. Swift enforces exclusivity using both compile-time and run-time checks. The generated run-time checks trap when an exclusivity violation is detected at runtime. Calls into Swift APIs from C++ should verify exclusivity for Swift values as well.

### Performance

Swift to C++ bridging should be as efficient as possible. The Swift compiler should avoid unnecessary overhead for calling into Swift functions from C++, or using Swift types from C++. Furthermore, the bridging code should not convert Swift types into their C++ counterparts automatically as that can add a lot of overhead. For instance, a Swift function returning a String should still return a Swift String in C++, and not a std::string.

> Certain Swift features do not have a corresponding C++ mapping which can impose some additional overhead to make them work in C++. Resilient value types are a good example of this, as their layout and size is not known at compile time. This means that the generated C++ type that represents such a Swift type might need to impose additional performance overhead by allocating the storage for such value dynamically on the heap (i.e. boxing). In cases like this, the Swift compiler should strive to have minimal possible overhead, by finding solutions where this overhead can be optimized out for common cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some Swift features require additional overhead to be used in C++. Resilient value types are a good example of this; C++ expects types to have a statically-known layout, but Swift's resilient value types do not satisfy this, and so the generated C++ types representing those types may need to dynamically allocate memory internally. In cases like these, the C++ interface should at least strive to minimize the dynamic overhead, for example by avoiding allocation for sufficiently small types.
```

### Achieving Safety With Performance In Mind

Certain aspects of Swift’s memory model impose certain restrictions that create tension between the goal of achieving safety and the goal of avoiding unnecessary overhead for calling into Swift from C++. Checking for exclusivity violations is a good example of this, as the C++ compiler does not have a notion of exclusivity it can verify, meaning that it is difficult to prove that a value is accessed exclusively in the C++ code that calls into Swift. This means that the C++ code that calls into Swift APIs will most likely require more run-time checks to validate exclusivity than similar Swift code that calls the same Swift APIs.

> The adherence to Swift’s type and memory safety rules should be prioritized ahead of performance when C++ calls into Swift, even if this means more run-time checks are required. This is needed to avoid unexpected crashes or other unexpected behavior in users Swift code. For users seeking maximum performance, Swift provides additional compiler flags that avoid certain run-time checks. Those flags should be taken into account when the C++ header is generated. An example of such flag is -enforce-exclusivity. When  -enforce-exclusivity=none is passed to Swift, the Swift compiler does not emit any run-time checks that check for exclusivity violations. A flag like this should also affect the generated C++ header, and the Swift compiler should not emit any run-time checks for exclusivity in the generated C++ header when this flag is used.

Author: Yes, the flags are honored because the thunks are emitted inline in the header by the Swift compiler. So Swift can adjust the code in the thunk based on the flags that are used when the header is generated.

Some Swift APIs patterns will map to distinct C++ language constructs or patterns. For instance, an empty Swift enum with static members is commonly used in a namespace-like manner in Swift. This kind of enum can be mapped to a C++ namespace. It is a goal of C++ interoperability to provide a clear mapping for how Swift API patterns like this one are bridged to C++.

The semantics of how Swift types behave should be preserved when they’re mapped to C++. For instance, in C++, there should still be a semantic difference between Swift value and reference types. Additionally, Swift’s copy-on-write data types like Array should still obey the copy-on-write semantics in C++.

### Swift API Design Should be Unaffected

> Swift API authors should not change the way they write Swift code and design Swift APIs based on how specific Swift language constructs are exposed to C++. They should use the most effective Swift constructs for the task. C++ interop should provide best effort view for these constructs without imposing decisions or restrictions that might limit the Swift API designers and authors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swift API authors should not change the way they write Swift code and design Swift APIs based on how specific Swift language constructs are exposed to C++. They should use the most effective Swift constructs for the task. It is a key goal of C++ interoperability that the exposed C++ interfaces are safe, performant, and ergonomic enough that programmers will not be tempted to make their Swift code worse just to make the C++ interfaces better.

### Bridging Swift Types

The generated header contains C++ class types that represent Swift’s struct , enum and class types that are exposed in the Swift module. These types provide access to methods, properties and other members using idiomatic C++ constructs, or non-idiomatic C++ constructs that allow C++ to access more functionality in a consistent manner. These types follow Swift semantics. For instance, a C++ value of Swift’s struct type gets copied and destroyed using Swift’s copy and destroy semantics. C++ also provides mechanisms that allow the programmer to move such values in a destructive way, i.e. “take” them. This ensures that C++ can interoperate with a wider range of Swift APIs and types, such as Swift’s move only types.

> Protocol types also get exposed to C++. They provide access to their protocol interface to C++. The generated header also provides facilities to combine protocol types into a protocol composition type. The protocol composition type provides access to the combined protocol interface in C++. 

Author: I'm not sure what you mean by ABC, could you elaborate on that. I would prefer not to go into specific details about protocol types though, as we don't have a specific implementation design prototyped for them yet.

### Bridging Generics

> Swift generic functions and types get bridged to C++ as C++ function and class templates. A generated C++ template instantiates a type-checked generic interface that uses the underlying polymorphic semantics that generics require when Swift APIs are called from the generated header. Type-checking is performed using the requires clause introduced in C++20. When C++17 and earlier is used, type-checking is performed using other legacy methods, like enable_if and static_assert.

Author: Yes, they would be compatible with delayed template parsing. I will call that out.
